Uncorrected OCR

Grandfather---5amuel with Wi'inkli~yes, Jn()Qftaehe , ~
dashing dark red handkerchief- was a 'freethinker', as atheists
were then called, who occasionally took snuff and enjoyed a glass of
port. 11 He belonged to the Order of Odd Fellows, the oldest of· the
several orders ofBritish lodges transplanted to Australia, 12 committed
to ideals of brotherhood, democratic sharing of responsibility
and mutual financial assistance. Modesdy imitating the ritual and
symbolism of Freemasonry, the Odd Fellows appealed largely tc;>
tradesmen and skilled artisans. In time, Stead took his turn for a
year as Grand Noble of his local Lodge.
His wife Christina. by contrast. was a kind-faced but plain
woman, with an austere, world-renouncing piety. As a member of
the Plymouth Brethren, a nonconformist Protestant sect, she regarded
smoking, alcohol, d~cing, gambling and the theatre as vices. 13 But
like the Odd Fellows, the Brethren were strongly democratic,
rejecting ecclesiastical organisation on the grounds that it was a
denial of the spiritual equality of all (male) believers. The younger
Stead children, David and Florence, occasionally accompanied their
mother to meetings. David's strong individualism may well have
reflected his mother's anti-hierarchical tradition.
David George was born on 6 March 1877. He was a handsome
boy, with thick yellow hair, tender blue eyes and a happy nature.
According to his daughter Christina he actually shone: his 'pale
blaze' came from more than just his fairness; it was a sign, spe
believed, of his 'vitality' and 'self-trust". It dazzled people. If his
older siblings had 'some sentimental and quite uninformed views of
England', David responded to the country ofhis birth like Adam in
Eden. 'Australia was his prolific and innocent garden. '14
Despite their mother's cultural sobriety, the Stead household was
cheerful and musical, with frequent family singsongs around the
piano. When they sang in the evenings in the· front room with the
lights on and the blinds up-tunes from operas and rousing old
favourites like 'The Batde Cry of Freedom', 'When johnny Comes
Marching Home' and 'John Brown's Body'-passers-by would
stop in the street to Jisten. 15
One terrible night in the winter of 1893, their mother died of ~n
angina attack. 16 She was 44. Only 16 years old and particularly close
to his mother, David was devastated. He vowed to keep her rulc:S of
life. Christina Stead, her grandmother's namesake, recalls:
.
f
'
4
He neve!' went to the theatre or to concerts; he abhorred
dan <:jog, because of the contact of bodies; he. did not allow
.kissing or embracing in the-home, nor endearments, nor
cajoling, which he thought led to degrading habits of mind ...
· , ttally-ttmes from eperas.--ba-~---
only moral operas~Martha, William .Tell, Maritana ... He was
shocked that the ·arts so often dealt with what seemed to a pure
man, unsavoury subjects. 17
Indeed, David George held a strange mixture of both parents'
views, and with passionate fervour. He was an atheist, like his
father, and so committed to atheism that he refused to enter a
church. Yet he was a puritan, like his mother, and just as firm about
never letting a drop of alcohol pass his lips. He had his father's good
looks and liveliness, and his mother's sureness of purpose.
:AH duee boys left school at dte age of
became painters and signwriters; David was apprenticed to _the
Sydney rubber-stamp maker Karl Faulk, where he learnt to pride
himself·on his decorative lettering. 18 But Nature had always been
his passion. In his late teens he attended a zoology course at Sydney
Technical College, where he boiled down and mounted a cat and a
dog that would stare at his children from glass cases. And he
became an active member of the New South Wales Naturalists'
Society, a group of committed amateurs. In 1898, at 21, he joined
the Linnean Society of New South Wales, the professional naturalists'
body. By .1900 he bad several short articles published by the
prestigious British Linnean Society.
* * *
David's lively younger sister Florence-who had her father's beautiful
voice and taste for acting-went to work at 14 as a seamstress
in the workrooms of David Jones, the fashionable department
store. It was through Florence that David met Ellen Butters, an
embroideress, whom he married . on 17 Augus~ 1901, the year
Australia was formally declared an independent nation. It was a
nation of divided loyalties-the fierce nationalism of the 1890s was
countered by cultural ties to the British Empire and Mother England.
The Federal Parliament had been opened in Melbourne by the
Duke of York (later King George V), and Australian volunteers
were fighting for the Empire in the Boer War.
Twenty-five-year-old Ellen Stead, pretty, geode and pious, also
found her loyalties divided that year. Though she came from an
ardently devout family, her wedding was not a religious service: the
~·.
5
24-year-old groom was adamant about that. It is thought that .he
even tried to forbid his wife to pray. Ellen•s father. equally hea~strong,
banished his daughter and her new husband from the fami,ly
home. Ellen•s brother Duncan later claimed that she visited her
mother and sihHngs secredy.!!and was bcw:ildued by the strang.e_
WC?rld into which she had married: •snakes in the copper and
creatures everywhere and she not allowed to pray'. 20
Two months after her marriage Ellen was pregnant, and it was in
their modest two-roomed cabin on Kimpton Street, Rockdale,
south of the city, that Christina Ellen S~ead was born on 17 July
1902, the year that Australian women gained the right to vote in
federal elections. Grandfather Butters refused to speak to his daughter
or look at his grandchild. 21
In the next year or so, the family moved to Oakleigh Villa,
a whitewashed house with a ston~ verandah and pidtet feaeo1
standing alone on a rutty road leading to Rockdale station. 22 Dayid
· Stead set up his menagerie in the back garden. He kept venomous
black:~nakes, and a dia'mond snake, whose·erraticeatirig habits he
noted with interest. 23 However, his special interest was not snakes
but fish. David Stead's expertise in this area was acknowledged· by
the NSW Fisheries Commission, who employed him in May 1902,
although he had no formal qualifications. He was made a scientific
assistant under Harold Dannevig, Director of Fisheries for the
Commonwealth. That year the government printer published his
article on the Murray cod.
Christina Stead liked to think she looked like her mother. but the
one surviving photograph of Ellen Butters reveals little resemblance.
In the solemn studio photograph, Ellen is in her early teens:
a comely adolescent with docile brown eyes, full lips and a long
dark plait. She is wearing a prim dress with a high neck, leg-ofmutton
sleeves, and a fur collar clasped by a large, ornate brooch.
A lace kerchief is tucked into her belted waist and she has a white
communion book in her lap. She looks timid, submissive-the
daughter of an authoritarian Victorian father.
As a child, Christina was very fair and had several ofher father's
features, though in her, unfortunately, they did not form the same
harmonious blend. Her father was tall and strongly built. In
photographs he has the air .of a man who knows he is handsome.
His large forehead, prominent nose and resolute chin give him•a
proud, self-confident bearing. His daughter had the same imperious·
presence.
In the family it was said that Christina looked like her father's
